[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Instead of the term how
can we love ourselves more,
I'd like to ask how can
we accept ourselves more?
That in the way most of
us have been socialized,
the way in which a child
gets the initial learning,
is that the parent
is under pressure
to socialize the child, to make
the child socially functional.
And in doing that, they--
emotionally, whether
they intend to or not,
reward and punish the
child for behaviors,
and the result is that
the child develops
certain emotional feelings
that certain ways it
is in its natural state
are not acceptable.
And the result is some
feelings of unworthiness,
or inadequacy, or something
in most human beings
as the result of socialization.
Then you build this
social structure.
And, often, what you end up
with is a personality that's
constantly looking to the
world and other people,
do you approve of me?
Do you like me?
Am I good enough?
Am I acceptable to you?
Have I achieved enough?
And you get an A for
effort, and you feel good.
And if you don't get the A,
it's not like you feel nothing.
You feel bad.
And it's as if the baseline
is negative, not zero,
so that you're constantly using
your life experiences as a way
to disprove a basic negative
feeling about yourself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
Right behind that is where the
spiritual dimension begins.
And that's a part that looks at
the universe, and just sees it
as it is.
Or we could say,
let's go behind love
and hate and find a
place where we merely
acknowledge ourselves, where
we just allow our humanity.
And we hear that there
is negativity in us
and there is inadequacy,
and we allow ourselves.
And the word that
I have come up with
is the word appreciation,
that we come
to just appreciate what is.
You know, in the sense of just
appreciating what they are,
including yourself.
You're just starting to
appreciate yourself, appreciate
your humanity, like
I'm supposed to be.
I'm Ram Dass.
And I've worked
on myself, and I'm
supposed to be equanimous,
loving, present, clear,
compassionate, accepting.
Oftentimes, I get tired.
I'm angry.
I'm petulant.
I'm closed down.
Now, for a long time, I
get into those states,
and I would feel really
embarrassed because that isn't
who Ram Dass is supposed to be.
So I would appear like I was
warm, charming, equanimous,
compassionate, and there was
deviousness and deception
involved.
And then I realized that's bad
business because that cuts us
off from each other.
And I had to risk my truth.
I had to risk being
human with other people
and realize that what we
offer each other is our truth,
and our truth includes
all of our stuff.
And the first thing I had to
do was accept my own truth.
I had to allow myself
to be a human being.
I had always assumed the way to
God was to deny your humanity
and embrace your divinity.
And then I realized
that the way to truth
might be through acknowledging
the fullness of where
I found myself to be, which was
my humanity and my divinity.
And not wallow in it, but
acknowledge it, and allow it.
And not reverence it, or
judge it, just appreciate it,
just allow it,
allow my humanity.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now what I found was
that, as I started
to allow myself to be human
more, just allowed what I am,
things fell away more quickly.
It was as if I was
locked into a model which
was based on that negativity,
that dislike of myself.
And once I just allowed that I
am human with all the foibles,
things started to flow, and I
could feel change occurring in
myself.
And then I would start to
experience my own beauty.
And it frightened me because it
was so dissonant and discrepant
from the model that I
had cultivated of myself
over the years, that I had to do
good in order to be beautiful.
And I began to
expand my awareness
to be able to look at
the universe as it is
and see what is called
the horrible beauty of it,
the horrible beauty of it.
I mean, there's horror
and beauty in all of it
because there's
decay in all of it.
I mean, we're all decaying.
I mean, I look at my
hand, and it's decaying.
And it's beautiful and
horrible at the same moment,
and I just live with that.
And with that, I start
to see the beauty in it.
So we're talking
about appreciating
what is, not loving yourself as
opposed to not liking yourself,
but allowing yourself.
And as you allow, it changes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]